---
title: 'Playing with Pico-8'
pubDate: 2023-08-09
description: 'Combining my love of retro games with my love of programming.'
author: 'Chris Moles'
tags: ["pico-8", "game-development", "lua"]
---

Earlier this year, I stumbled on the Pico-8 fantasy console. I was immediately
taken with the idea of a console that was designed to be programmed on. All the
tools are built into the system itself with a built-in code editor, sprite
editor, map editor, sound editor, and music editor. It's a complete package for
making retro games.

### Programming

I've been programming for a long time, but I've never made a game. What's funny
is that I remember fantasizing about making games when I was a kid. Every time I
picked up the controller, I would think about how cool it would be to make
something with my own vision, my own rules, my own characters. By the time I
started focusing on programming as a career, I had forgotten about that dream.

Much of it had to do with the fact that I didn't know where to start. Games
seemed too expensive to produce. Even the indie games that were breaking the AAA
mold still seemed like they required a team of people to make. So, I moved on
and focused on other things.

But, when I found Pico-8, I realized that I could make a game by myself. I could
easily just throw some pixels together to make a character, and I could write
little instructions, and suddenly I had a game. It might not be a good game, but
it was something that felt alive. It was something that I could play with. And
as I kept tooling the instructions, the game would get better and better -- more
alive.

### Evolving the Game

I've been working on a game for a few months now. It started as just a little
character that could run around. It was boring, so I added a street and
sidewalk and a building front. Still boring, so I added cars to drive on the
street. Now it was starting to move, but it wasn't enough, so I added
pedestrians to add more movement to the game. Now it was starting to feel like a
real city. It was almost like watching a 16-bit movie.

### Limitations

I'm still working on it, and I'm running into my other favorite part of the
challenge of programming with the Pico-8: limited resources.

I can't add everything I want to the game. I have to make choices. I have to
figure out what's important and what's not. I have to figure out what I can get
from each sprite, function, and line of code. I have to figure out the entire
game's objective. I have to figure out what the game is about.

### The Objective

What's really been fun is that I like to make games without any idea of what the
point of playing the game is. Honestly, I don't know the point of games. I don't
really play video games anymore because I didn't see the point. Was it to make a
high score? Was it to feel accomplished?

I've been reflecting a lot about that as I've been writing. I keep going back to
when I was a kid fantasizing with these games. I was terrible at them, and I
hated how hard some of the games were. Was I playing to win? Not really. I was
playing as an escape -- or curiosity.

I liked the idea of just controlling a character in a crazy world. That was the
fun part. The game just happened to be something to do while you're in the
world. I think that's why I like open-world games so much. I can just wander at
my leisurely pace and explore the world. I don't have to worry about winning or
losing some objective that has no impact on my real life. It's just
entertainment.
